Freelance blog post - PostHog vs Langfuse (#18134)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/posthog-vs-langfuse.mdx

---
title: 'PostHog vs Langfuse in-depth tool comparison'
date: 2026-07-02
author:
  - natalia-amorim
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/ai_powered_features_13eba8675a.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
  - Comparisons
seo:
    metaTitle: 'PostHog vs Langfuse in-depth tool comparison'
    metaDescription: "PostHog is an all-in-one developer platform with AI observability. Langfuse is a dedicated AI engineering platform. Here's how they compare on features and pricing."
---

"It works in the playground" is the "it works on my machine" of AI development. Everything's great, until it isn't.

> A real user types something you never tested, your agent takes a hard left turn, and suddenly you're scrolling through raw logs trying to reconstruct what happened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A real user types something you never tested, your agent takes a hard left turn, and suddenly you're scrolling through logs trying to reconstruct what happened.
```

Reviewer: overall nice though, thanks!

> Both [PostHog](/) and [Langfuse](/blog/best-langfuse-alternatives) exist for this exact moment. They both show you [what your LLMs are actually doing](blog/what-is-ai-observability) in production – traces, token costs, latency, the works. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both [PostHog](/) and [Langfuse](/blog/best-langfuse-alternatives) exist for this exact moment. They both show you [what your LLMs are actually doing](/blog/what-is-ai-observability) in production – traces, token costs, latency, the works. 
```

But they take different roads to get there, and which road you want depends on what kind of visibility you're after.

1. **Langfuse** is a dedicated [AI observability](/blog/what-is-ai-observability) platform with deep tracing, prompt management, evaluation pipelines, and dataset experiments. It's open source (MIT licensed), self-hostable, and built for teams that want to own every layer of their AI stack. It was acquired by ClickHouse in January 2026.

> 2. **PostHog** is a developer platform for building self-driving products. [AI observability](/ai-observability) is one of many tools alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [surveys](/surveys), and more. It's built for AI-pilled teams who want discover issues wherever they exist, make improvements fast, and evaluate that they actually work. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **PostHog** is a developer platform for building self-driving products. [AI observability](/ai-observability) is one of many tools alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [surveys](/surveys), and more. It's built for AI-pilled teams who want to discover issues wherever they exist, make improvements fast, and evaluate that they actually work. 
```

## How is PostHog different?

### 1. We connect model performance to user behavior

PostHog connects your [traces](/docs/ai-observability/traces) to the rest of the picture. Every span links to a user with their full usage and business context, so you can tell whether a bad generation hit a churning free-trial user or your biggest enterprise account. You can also jump straight from a trace into [session replay](/session-replay) to watch what the user actually experienced. 

When your assistant's response quality dips, you can check whether that tracks with a drop in retention or if users even noticed the regression.

### 2. We let you A/B test prompts and AI features on real users

> Although both have prompt playgrounds, PostHog goes further with [prompt experiments (beta)](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments) let you pit two or more versions of a prompt against each other. It splits users between them [via a feature flag](/docs/feature-flags) and reports cost, latency, eval pass rate, and usage analytics per variant, with a confidence interval against the control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although both have prompt playgrounds, PostHog goes further with [prompt experiments (beta)](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments) that let you pit two or more versions of a prompt against each other. It splits users between them [via a feature flag](/docs/feature-flags) and reports cost, latency, eval pass rate, and usage analytics per variant, with a confidence interval against the control.
```

        'ai_observability.tracing.features.hierarchical_traces',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.custom_spans',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.tool_call_tracking',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.rag_retrieval_tracking',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.session_grouping',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.opentelemetry_support',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.async_ingestion',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.multi_model_support',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.session_replay_link',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.user_profile_context',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.sql_queries_on_traces',
        'ai_observability.tracing.features.trace_explorer_ui',
    ]}
/>
</p>

**Keep in mind:** Langfuse's trace visualization UI is more mature as it was purpose-built for trace exploration, so the waterfall views and detail panels are more polished. However, PostHog's advantage is what happens *around* the trace. You can link the trace to the user's session recording and behavioral history. You can also query trace data alongside product events using SQL.

### Prompt management

> Langfuse built prompt management as a core pillar from day one. However, PostHog is playing catch-up with a [Prompt Management](/docs/prompt-management) tool (currently in beta). But while it already covers versioning, runtime fetching, and A/B testing of prompt versions, Langfuse is still further along with features like labels, playground testing, and composable prompts.

Reviewer: core pillar and day one are both cliche, so lets just have one of them

```suggestion
Langfuse had prompt management from day one. However, PostHog is playing catch-up with a [Prompt Management](/docs/prompt-management) tool (currently in beta). While PostHog's tool already covers versioning, runtime fetching, and A/B testing of prompt versions, Langfuse is still further along with features like labels, playground testing, and composable prompts.
```

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={['posthog', 'langfuse']}
    rows={[
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.prompt_versioning',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.template_variables',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.prompt_deployment_api',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.version_comparison',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.prompt_labels',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.prompt_playground',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.composable_prompts',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.mcp_server_for_prompts',
        'ai_observability.prompt_management.features.ab_test_prompt_versions',
    ]}
/>
</p>

> **Worth noting:** Right now, PostHog's prompt management handles core workflows like creating versioned prompts for fetching them at runtime with caching and fallback. But Langfuse still has deeper features, such as environment-based deployment labels and composable prompt chains. If you really need in-depth metrics *just for LLM* features, Langfuse is the stronger pick.

Reviewer: I think this duplicates a lot of what's said in the sentence above. The in-depth metrics bit maybe doesn't even make sense to include here. 
```suggestion
```

### Evals and datasets

> Both tools score outputs with LLM-as-a-judge and custom code evaluators. Langfuse goes further into pre-deployment quality workflows: annotation queues for scoring specific parts of a trace, curated datasets, and experiment runs across them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both tools can score outputs with LLM-as-a-judge and custom code evaluators. Langfuse goes further into pre-deployment quality workflows: annotation queues for scoring specific parts of a trace, curated datasets, and experiment runs across them. 
```

PostHog has whole-trace human reviews rather than span-level annotations, and dataset-based eval runs are on the roadmap. 

> For pre-deployment quality assurance, Langfuse is the stronger pick right now.

Reviewer: Let's let people decide that themselves 😅 
```suggestion
```

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={['posthog', 'langfuse']}
    rows={[
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.llm_as_a_judge',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.code_evaluators',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.annotation_queues',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.datasets',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.experiment_runs',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.ab_experiments_on_product_metrics',
    ]}
/>
</p>

> **Keep in mind:** When we use the term "experiments," it can mean different things within Langfuse and PostHog. Langfuse experiment runs execute an eval pipeline across a curated dataset to score quality *before* you deploy. PostHog experiments are statistical A/B tests on live users, measuring retention, conversion, and revenue *after* you deploy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Keep in mind:** "Experiments" means different things in Langfuse and PostHog. Langfuse experiment runs execute an eval pipeline across a curated dataset to score quality *before* you deploy. PostHog experiments are statistical A/B tests on live users, measuring retention, conversion, and revenue *after* you deploy.
```

### Cost tracking and analytics

Right now, both tools track token usage and calculate costs per model call. But the gap is in how far you can slice that data.

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={['posthog', 'langfuse']}
    rows={[
        'ai_observability.costs.features.token_counting',
        'ai_observability.costs.features.cost_calculation',
        'ai_observability.costs.features.cost_by_model',
        'ai_observability.costs.features.cost_trends',
        'ai_observability.costs.features.cost_by_user',
        'ai_observability.costs.features.cost_by_feature',
        'ai_observability.costs.features.cost_by_cohort',
    ]}
/>
</p>

**Heads-up:** Even though both tools tell you how much you're spending on LLM calls, the questions they answer are completely different. Langfuse breaks down costs by trace and model, which is useful for finding which calls are expensive.

> But PostHog adds another layer to that question. You can dig into the user-side of things and answer questions like "Which user segment costs us the most?" or "Do high-value users cost more than users who churn?" You can do this because cost data sits alongside your product analytics and can be queried with SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But PostHog adds another layer to that question. You can dig into the user side of things and answer questions like "Which user segment costs us the most?" or "Do high-value users cost more than users who churn?" This is possible because cost data sits alongside your product analytics and data warehouse which can all be queried together with SQL.
```

### Platform

If you need those LLM-specific workflows today, Langfuse has more of them. If you need your AI data connected to product analytics, session replay, feature flags, experimentation, and a lot more, PostHog is the better alternative.

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={['posthog', 'langfuse']}
    rows={[
        'ai_observability',
        'product_analytics',
        'web_analytics',
        'session_replay',
        'feature_flags',
        'experiments',
        'error_tracking',
        'surveys',
        'data_warehouse',
        'cdp',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_management',
        'ai_observability.features.human_annotation',
        'ai_observability.features.evaluation_datasets',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_playground',
        'platform.deployment.open_source',
        'platform.deployment.eu_hosting',
    ]}
/>
</p>

## Pricing and open source

> As of June 2026, PostHog and Langfuse are MIT-licensed and open source. You can inspect the code and even contribute if needed. Also, both platforms offer a self-hosted version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of July 2026, PostHog and Langfuse are MIT-licensed and open source. You can inspect the code and even contribute if needed. Also, both platforms offer a self-hosted version.
```

> When it comes to pricing, Langfuse uses tier-based pricing, while PostHog uses [usage-based pricing](/pricing) with no seat limits, so you can pay for only what you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When it comes to pricing, Langfuse uses a combination of tier and usage-based pricing, while PostHog is entirely [usage-based pricing](/pricing) , so you can pay for only what you need. Langfuse's free tier has a limit of 2 seats, but doesn't charge extra for them on paid plans. PostHog has unlimited seats on its free plan. 
```

|  | PostHog | Langfuse |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Pricing model** | Usage-based | Tiered plans |
| **Free tier** | Generous limits per product (100,000 events free per month for AI observability) | 50,000 units/month (Units \= Count of Traces \+ Count of Observations \+ Count of Scores) |
| **Seat limits** | None, as you get unlimited users on every plan | 2 users on the free plan |

> | **Paid plans** | Pay only for usage above free tier (Starts at $0.00006/event) | Starts at $29/month for 100k units (extra events at $0.00008/event) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Paid plans** | Pay only for usage above free tier (Starts at $0.00006/event) | Starts at $29/month for 100k units (extra at $0.00008/unit) |
```

| **Overages** | Scales with usage | Billed on top of the paid tier |
| **Startup program** | [$50,000 in free credits](/startups) for 12 months | 50% off the first year |
| **License** | MIT | MIT |

## When to choose PostHog vs Langfuse

The platform you choose for LLM or AI observability will depend on your current stack, team size, and analytics needs. Here's a quick guide to help you decide:

### Choose PostHog for AI observability if:

> - You're building AI features as part of a larger product and want to understand how they affect user behavior and business outcomes.- Your primary question is how your AI features perform for real users, and answering that requires traces connected to product data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You're building AI features as part of a larger product and want to understand how they affect user behavior and business outcomes.
- Your primary question is how your AI features perform for real users, and answering that requires traces connected to product data.
```

- You need to A/B test different models or prompt variants and measure their impact on business metrics like conversion and retention.
- You want one platform for your entire product data stack, from web analytics and error tracking to LLM monitoring.
- You already use PostHog for analytics, session replay, experiments, or something else, and want to add AI observability without introducing another tool in your stack.

### Choose Langfuse for AI observability if:

- LLM observability is your primary concern, and you don't need surrounding tools.
- You need prompt management, evaluation pipelines, annotation queues, or dataset experiments today.
- Your team is focused on improving model output quality before shipping, with workflows like LLM-as-a-judge scoring and curated dataset experiments.
- You want to self-host a standalone LLM observability tool.

<WizardCTA />

## Recommendations by team type

**For startups building their first AI feature:**

> - **PostHog** – You need analytics, session replay, feature flags, and error tracking anyway. So, adding AI observability to the same platform saves you from having to manage another vendor for something that's still finding product-market fit. Start with traces and cost tracking, then layer in experiments when you're ready to iterate on prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **PostHog** – You need analytics, session replay, feature flags, and error tracking anyway. So, adding AI observability to the same platform saves you from having to manage another vendor while you're finding product-market fit. Start with traces and cost tracking, then layer in experiments when you're ready to iterate on prompts.
```

**For ML/AI teams focused on model quality:**

- **Langfuse** – If your day-to-day is iterating on prompts, running evals, managing annotation queues, and curating test datasets, Langfuse's depth will be a better fit for your needs. You can pair it with whatever analytics tool the product team already uses.

**For product teams adding AI to an existing app:**

> - **PostHog** – Your question is "Did this AI feature actually help users?" That requires connecting LLM traces to user behavior - funnels, retention, session recordings, and A/B experiments. At the moment, very few LLM observability tools give you that context and PostHog is one of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **PostHog** – Your question is "Did this AI feature actually help users?" That requires connecting LLM traces to user behavior - funnels, retention, session recordings, and experiments. At the moment, very few LLM observability tools give you that context and PostHog is one of them.
```

**For enterprises with separate LLMOps and product teams:**

> - **PostHog or Langfuse** – You can use Langfuse for the LLM engineering team's inner loop (prompt iteration, evals, dataset management, quality assurance). And add PostHog for the product team so that they can measure business outcomes after shipping the feature. They solve different problems for different people in the organization,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **PostHog or Langfuse** – You can use Langfuse for the LLM engineering team's inner loop (prompt iteration, evals, dataset management, quality assurance). And add PostHog for the product team so that they can measure business outcomes after shipping the feature. They solve different problems for different people in the organization. 
```

> ## Frequently asked questions

Reviewer: A good FAQ might be PostHog events vs Langfuse units.

Here's Claude:

Good question — it's the crux of why the comparison is tricky. Here's the distinction:

## Langfuse units
A **unit** is any single record Langfuse stores, of three types:

**Units = Traces + Observations + Scores**

- **Trace** — the top-level container for one request (e.g. one chatbot turn). 1 per request.
- **Observation** — every step *inside* the trace: each LLM call (generation), each retrieval/function step (span), each event. A trace with 3 LLM calls + 2 retrieval steps = 5 observations.
- **Score** — an evaluation attached to a trace/observation: LLM-as-judge results, human annotations, experiment scores.

So the trace itself is billed as its own unit, *plus* everything in it, *plus* every eval you run on it. That's why one trace ≈ ~7 units in their example (1 trace + ~6 observations + a fraction of a score).

## PostHog events
PostHog bills per **event**, and every captured item is a separate `$ai_*` event:

- `$ai_generation` — one LLM call (the primary/most common event)
- `$ai_span` — an operation within a trace (retrieval, function call)
- `$ai_trace` — the trace-level record
- `$ai_embedding` — a vectorization call

There's no separate "score" event type the way Langfuse has — evals in PostHog aren't billed as a distinct ingestion unit in the same way.

## The practical differences

|                         | Langfuse unit        | PostHog event               |
| ----------------------- | -------------------- | --------------------------- |
| **Trace container**     | billed (1 unit)      | billed (`$ai_trace`)        |
| **Each LLM call**       | billed (observation) | billed (`$ai_generation`)   |
| **Each span/step**      | billed (observation) | billed (`$ai_span`)         |
| **Evals / annotations** | **billed (score)**   | not a billed ingestion unit |
| **Rate**                | $8 per 100k          | $6 per 100k ($0.00006 each) |

**Bottom line:** the two count instrumentation items almost identically (trace + every observation/span), so for the same app they land at roughly the same volume — which is why applying the same ~7× multiplier to both is fair. The two real divergences are:

1. **Scores.** If you run lots of evals/annotations, Langfuse's unit count climbs faster than PostHog's event count, because those are billable units in Langfuse but not billable events in PostHog.
2. **Instrumentation depth.** If you only wrap LLM calls and skip spans, both drop — but PostHog can drop further if you don't emit the trace/span wrapper events.

So "units" and "events" are conceptually the same idea (one billed record per captured thing), differing mainly in what counts as billable (Langfuse adds scores) and the per-item price ($8 vs $6 per 100k).

<details>
<summary>What's the main difference between PostHog and Langfuse?</summary>

**Langfuse** is a dedicated LLM observability tool that provides tracing, prompt management, evaluation, and annotation queues. **PostHog** is an all-in-one platform for self-driving products where AI observability is one tool alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), and more. 

> The difference comes down to depth versus breadth - for AI observability. While Langfuse goes deeper on LLM-specific workflows, PostHog connects your LLM data to everything else happening in your product.

Reviewer: I don't think it's exclusively AI observability on depth versus breadth.
```suggestion
The difference comes down to depth versus breadth. While Langfuse goes deeper on LLM-specific workflows, PostHog connects your LLM data to everything else happening in your product.
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Is PostHog or Langfuse better for LLM observability specifically?</summary>

Depends on what you mean by "better." For trace visualization, evaluation pipelines, annotation queues, and prompt playground testing, **Langfuse** is more mature. That has been its sole focus since its launch.

> But for connecting traces to user behavior or running tests during AI deployment, **PostHog** is a much better option. You can run A/B tests on prompt variants, replay the session where a bad AI response happened, and query trace data alongside product events via SQL. It gives you a more comprehensive answer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But for connecting traces to user behavior or running tests on AI-powered features, **PostHog** is a much better option. You can A/B tests on prompt variants, replay sessions with a bad AI responses, and query trace data alongside product events via SQL. 
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Can PostHog replace Langfuse?</summary>

For many teams, yes. **PostHog** covers tracing, cost tracking, [prompt management](/docs/prompt-management/prompts) (beta), and A/B testing of prompt versions. But it also offers product analytics, session replay, flags, error tracking, and more, which Langfuse doesn't. That said, if you need advanced AI observability features like an annotation queue for human review or composable prompt chains, you'll still need **Langfuse** (or both\!).

</details>

<details>
<summary>Can I use PostHog and Langfuse together?</summary>

> Yes. Both support `OpenTelemetry` so that you can instrument your LLM calls once and send traces to both platforms. [PostHog and Langfuse](/docs/ai-observability/integrations/langfuse-posthog) also offer a built-in integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes. Both support `OpenTelemetry` so you can instrument your LLM calls once and send traces to both platforms. [PostHog and Langfuse](/docs/ai-observability/integrations/langfuse-posthog) also offer a built-in integration.
```

The trade-off is maintaining two platforms. That means more setup, more integrations, and potentially more cost. For smaller teams, or teams where AI is one part of a broader product, PostHog is usually simpler to manage.

However, if you need the specialized features of both platforms, using them together can provide a more comprehensive solution.

</details>

<details>
<summary>What is the best alternative to Langfuse?</summary>

It depends on what you're looking for. For dedicated LLM observability and tracing, LangSmith and Braintrust are the closest alternatives as they both focus on tracing, evals, and prompt iteration.

> If you want LLM observability as part of a broader product analytics platform, **PostHog** is the [best alternative to Langfuse](/blog/langfuse-alternatives). We're the only tool that ties model performance to actual product outcomes on a single platform.

Reviewer: we're not the only unfortunately
```suggestion
If you want LLM observability as part of a broader product analytics platform, **PostHog** is the [best alternative to Langfuse](/blog/best-langfuse-alternatives). We tie model performance to actual product outcomes on a single platform.
```

You can find a few more in our [guide on LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).

</details>

<details>
<summary>Which is better for prompt management?</summary>

**Langfuse** has the more complete prompt management system today, with features like:

- Prompt versioning
- Labels (production/staging/latest)
- A playground for interactive testing
- Composable prompt chains
- A deployment API

> **PostHog's** [prompt management](/docs/prompt-management/prompts) is in beta and covers versioning, template variables, runtime SDK fetching with caching, version diffs, and MCP server support. Where it does a better job is when you can A/B-test [prompt versions](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments) and measure cost, latency, and eval pass rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**PostHog's** [prompt management](/docs/prompt-management/prompts) is in beta and covers versioning, template variables, runtime SDK fetching with caching, version diffs, and MCP server support. Where it does a better job at A/B testing [prompt versions](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments) and measuring cost, latency, and eval pass rate.
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>Which is better for evals and testing LLM quality?</summary>

**Langfuse** is more mature for evaluating and testing LLM quality if you mean pre-deployment quality checks. It has LLM-as-a-judge scoring, custom code evaluators, human annotation queues, curated datasets, and experiment runs across those datasets. 

> If you mean post-deployment impact testing, PostHog is the better option. **PostHog** runs statistical A/B tests on live users to measure whether a change to your AI feature moved real product metrics, such as conversion or retention.

Reviewer: We also have evals which we shouldn't undersell here: https://posthog.com/docs/ai-evals

</details>

<details>
<summary>Is Langfuse open source? Is PostHog?</summary>

**Langfuse** and **PostHog** are MIT-licensed and open source. You can inspect the code, contribute, and self-host either product. You can find both repos below:

- PostHog's repo: [github.com/PostHog/posthog](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog).
- Langfuse's repo: [github.com/langfuse/langfuse](https://github.com/langfuse/langfuse).

</details>

<details>
<summary>Can I self-host PostHog or Langfuse? What's involved?</summary>

Yes to both. **Langfuse's** self-hosted stack requires `ClickHouse`, `Redis`, `Postgres`, and `S3`. **PostHog** requires `ClickHouse`, `Kafka`, `Postgres`, and `Redis`. Check each project's docs for the latest deployment guides.

> </details>

Reviewer: This dramatically undersells how complicated it is to self-host PostHog so I would rather not include it. 
```suggestion
```

<details>
<summary>How does pricing compare at scale?</summary>

> PostHog's pricing is usage-based with no seat limits. You pay for what you use across each product, starting from generous free tiers. The AI observability product is free for up to 100,000 events each month. Your 50th team member costs the same as your second team member. That said, Langfuse's pricing is tiered, with plans ranging from free (50,000 observations, 2 users) to $2,499/month for enterprise, with overages billed on top.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostHog's pricing is usage-based with no seat limits. You pay for what you use across each product, starting from generous free tiers. The AI observability product is free for up to 100,000 events each month. Your 50th team member costs the same as your second team member. That said, Langfuse's pricing is tiered, with plans ranging from free (50,000 units, 2 users) to $2,499/month for enterprise, with overages billed on top.
```

> At scale, the final bill will depend on your observation volume and team size. If you have a large team, PostHog's unlimited seats can save you money. If you have a small team but a very high trace volume, compare the per-event costs for [PostHog](/pricing) and Langfuse.

Reviewer: Although Langfuse has a limit of 2 seats for free tier, they don't have pay-per-seat so this whole section is sort of wrong. 

Would love to see the math of 100,000 traces, 500,000 traces, 1M traces, 5M traces or something like that. Maybe I'll ask an LLM.

Reviewer: Here's Claude:

Before the table, the critical thing to flag: **neither product bills by traces.** PostHog bills per **event** (each `$ai_generation`, `$ai_span`, `$ai_trace`, `$ai_embedding`), and Langfuse bills per **unit** (traces + observations + scores). One trace produces *many* billable items in both.

To make the comparison apples-to-apples, I used the ratio from Langfuse's own documented example: 140,131 units ÷ 20,070 traces ≈ **~7 billable items per trace**, and applied that same 7× to both platforms (a PostHog trace with ~6 generations/spans + the trace wrapper is roughly equivalent). All figures are **monthly**, both include 100k free.

| Traces / mo | Billable items (~7×) | **PostHog** | **Langfuse Core** | **Langfuse Pro** |
| ----------- | -------------------- | ----------- | ----------------- | ---------------- |
| 100,000     | 700,000              | **$36**     | $77               | $247             |
| 500,000     | 3,500,000            | **$204**    | $301              | $471             |
| 1,000,000   | 7,000,000            | **$414**    | $581              | $751             |
| 5,000,000   | 35,000,000           | **$2,094**  | $2,821            | $2,991           |

**Math:** PostHog = (items − 100k) × $0.00006 (i.e. **$6 per 100k**, no base fee). Langfuse = base ($29 Core / $199 Pro) + (units − 100k) × **$8 per 100k**.

**The result is driven by two things:** PostHog's per-item rate is ~25% lower ($6 vs $8 per 100k), and it has no monthly base. So PostHog is cheapest at every tier here; Langfuse Core's $29 base makes it competitive, while Pro's $199 base only stops mattering at high volume where overage dominates.

**Caveats that can move these numbers a lot:**
- **The 7× multiplier is the biggest lever.** Simpler traces (fewer LLM calls/spans) shrink all three columns proportionally; richer agentic traces grow them. Scale the table by your real observations-per-trace.
- **If you only instrument LLM calls in PostHog** (generations, not spans/trace wrappers), PostHog's effective multiplier drops below Langfuse's — Langfuse *always* counts the trace + every observation — so PostHog would come out even cheaper than shown.
- **Langfuse scores count as units.** Heavy LLM-as-judge / annotation / eval usage inflates Langfuse units faster than PostHog events.
- **Volume discounts not modeled.** Langfuse advertises "lower with volume" (calculator) and PostHog's per-event rate steps down at higher tiers — so the 5M row is an upper bound for both.
- **Plan features differ:** Core = 90-day data access; Pro = 3-year retention, higher rate limits, SOC2/ISO27001, HIPAA BAA. PostHog's AI observability rides on its broader platform.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Which is better for building an AI agent vs. adding LLM features to an existing product?</summary>

If you're building a standalone AI agent where the agent *is* the product, **Langfuse's** depth in trace exploration, eval pipelines, and annotation queues gives you a tighter feedback loop for iterating on agent behavior. If you're adding AI features to an existing product, **PostHog** is the stronger pick.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Why is session replay useful for AI observability?</summary>

Session replay gives you context that traces alone cannot. When a user gets a bad AI response, you can jump from the LLM trace to the exact session recording, inspect what the user did before and after, check console logs, review network requests, and debug the full experience.

</details>

<details>
<summary>How do feature flags make AI rollouts safer?</summary>

> Feature flags let you roll out new AI features, prompts, or model versions gradually. You can release to a small percentage of users, monitor traces and product metrics, and roll back instantly if something looks wrong — without redeploying code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feature flags let you roll out new AI features, prompts, or model versions gradually. You can release to a small percentage of users, monitor traces and product metrics, and roll back instantly if something looks wrong – without redeploying code.
```

</details>

<NewsletterForm />

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: 'PostHog vs Langfuse: in-depth tool comparison'
date: 2026-07-02
author:
  - natalia-amorim
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/ai_powered_features_13eba8675a.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
  - Comparisons

> 

Reviewer: missing one?

seo:

>     metaTitle: 'PostHog vs Langfuse: In-depth tool comparison'

Reviewer: Should these just be the same?

<img width="1460" height="460" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/db725b76-0ee7-470d-be37-1380b3e9a90c" />

```suggestion
title: 'PostHog vs Langfuse in-depth tool comparison'
date: 2026-07-02
author:
  - natalia-amorim
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/ai_powered_features_13eba8675a.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
  - Comparisons

seo:
    metaTitle: 'PostHog vs Langfuse in-depth tool comparison'
```

>     metaDescription: "PostHog is an all-in-one developer platform with AI observability. Langfuse is a dedicated LLM tool. Here's how they compare on features and pricing."

Reviewer: LLM tool isn't right, this is also what they say about themselves. 
```suggestion
    metaDescription: "PostHog is an all-in-one developer platform with AI observability. Langfuse is a dedicated AI engineering platform. Here's how they compare on features and pricing."
```

---

If you're shipping AI features, you're probably familiar with the pain of debugging a model call that worked fine in your playground but fell apart for real users.

> [PostHog](/) and [Langfuse](/blog/best-langfuse-alternatives) both help you get visibility into what your LLMs are actually doing in production, but they come at the problem from different starting points.

Reviewer: "different starting points" doesn't feel right + that is a link to this post

```suggestion
[PostHog](/) and Langfuse both help you get visibility into what your LLMs are actually doing in production, but focus on aspects of building AI-powered products beyond that.
```

Author: This post is a deep dive comparison, the link is to the alternatives one; i'll add your second suggestion to my commit

> [PostHog](/) and [Langfuse](/blog/best-langfuse-alternatives) both help you get visibility into what your LLMs are actually doing in production, but they come at the problem from different starting points.

Reviewer: Could we have a little more fun with the intro please?

> 1. **Langfuse** is a dedicated [AI observability](/blog/what-is-ai-observability) platform with deep tracing, prompt management, evaluation pipelines, and dataset experiments. It's open source (MIT licensed), self-hostable, and built for teams that want fine-grained control over their AI stack. It was acquired by ClickHouse in January 2026.

Reviewer: "fine-grained control" doesn't feel like the right phrasing, I would say "full observability" but we already used observability

> 2. **PostHog** is a developer platform for building self-driving products. [AI observability](/ai-observability) is one of many tools alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [surveys](/surveys), and more. It's built for engineers and product teams who want their AI data living next to everything else.

Reviewer: Do we have a more "self-driving-pilled" sentence than  "It's built for engineers and product teams who want their AI data living next to everything else." 

Not saying this is perfect but directionally, let's go this way and assume someone reading this is an "AI engineer"

```suggestion
2. **PostHog** is a developer platform for building self-driving products. [AI observability](/ai-observability) is one of many tools alongside [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [surveys](/surveys), and more. It's built for AI-pilled teams who want discover issues wherever they exist, make improvements fast, and evaluate that they actually work. 
```

## How is PostHog different?

### 1. We connect model performance to user behavior

Most [AI observability tools](/blog/best-ai-observability-tools) stop at the trace. You can see that a model call was slow or that a generation scored poorly on your eval pipeline, but you're left wondering whether any of that actually mattered to a real person on the other end of the screen.

> PostHog connects your [traces](/docs/ai-observability/traces) to the rest of the picture. Every span links to a user with a full behavioral history, so you can tell whether a bad generation hit a churning free-trial user or your biggest enterprise account. 

Reviewer: full behavioral history sort of under sells it
```suggestion
PostHog connects your [traces](/docs/ai-observability/traces) to the rest of the picture. Every span links to a user with their full usage and business context, so you can tell whether a bad generation hit a churning free-trial user or your biggest enterprise account. 
```

> When your assistant's response quality dips, you can check whether that tracks with a drop in retention or if users even noticed the regression. You can also jump straight from a trace into [session replay](/session-replay) to watch what the user actually experienced. Standalone AI observability tools can't do this because they don't have the session data to inform that analysis.

Reviewer: Could we combine these into two paragraphs max? Beyond the nice internal link in the first para, I don't think it adds much and a lot of what's in the third paragraph has already been said. 

Maybe missing something about logs or error tracking? 

```suggestion
PostHog connects your [traces](/docs/ai-observability/traces) to the rest of the picture. Every span links to a user with their full usage and business context, so you can tell whether a bad generation hit a churning free-trial user or your biggest enterprise account. You can also jump straight from a trace into [session replay](/session-replay) to watch what the user actually experienced. 

When your assistant's response quality dips, you can check whether that tracks with a drop in retention or if users even noticed the regression.
```

> *"I use PostHog primarily for product analytics and also for AI analytics and session recordings. I find it pretty easy to use and set up, and I appreciate that it's an all-in-one solution. The UX/UI is simple to understand, and whenever I'm stuck, its AI is very good at getting me back on track. I like that it provides a single UI for many analytics-related tools. I've used it for product analytics, AI analytics, and session recordings, but it can also handle web analytics, revenue analytics, heatmaps, and more. It serves as a data warehouse, providing a single point of access to all my data."*

> - Daniel A., [G2 user](https://www.g2.com/products/posthog/reviews/posthog-review-12089725)

Reviewer: I think this is just too long and also just feels like a random guy which isn't that helpful. Feels like we are hard selling before letting people compare.

```suggestion
```

### 2. We let you A/B test prompts and AI features on real users

Langfuse has a prompt playground where you can compare outputs side-by-side. That works well during development, but once your feature is in production serving real users, you need to know whether switching models or rewriting a prompt actually moved the needle on conversion or retention.

> PostHog enables you to do exactly that. [Prompt experiments (beta)](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments) let you pit two or more versions of a prompt against each other – PostHog splits users between them, routes each to the right version [via a feature flag](/docs/feature-flags), and reports cost, latency, and eval pass rate per variant, with a confidence interval against the control. So you can validate a wording tweak or a new system message before rolling it out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although both have prompt playgrounds, PostHog goes further with [prompt experiments (beta)](/docs/prompt-management/prompt-experiments) let you pit two or more versions of a prompt against each other. It splits users between them [via a feature flag](/docs/feature-flags) and reports cost, latency, eval pass rate, and usage analytics per variant, with a confidence interval against the control.
```

> And because [experiments](/experiments) aren't limited to prompts, you can take it further: route a percentage of users to a new model or retrieval strategy [with a feature flag](/feature-flags), then measure the impact on real product goals using PostHog's [Bayesian](/docs/experiments/statistics-bayesian) and [Frequentist](/docs/experiments/statistics-frequentist) stats engines.

Reviewer: We already said feature flag
```suggestion
And because [experiments](/experiments) aren't limited to prompts, you can take it further: route a percentage of users to a new model or retrieval strategy, then measure the impact on real product goals using PostHog's [Bayesian](/docs/experiments/statistics-bayesian) and [Frequentist](/docs/experiments/statistics-frequentist) stats engines.
```

> Even though eval scores are useful, they can't tell you whether users stuck around, and that's where the money is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### 3. We make your product self-driving

Because PostHog holds the full context of your product (traces, events, replays, errors, flags...), agents can use that context to find issues and ship improvements, not just surface them.

> And you can steer it from wherever you already work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because PostHog holds the full context of your product (traces, events, replays, errors, flags...), agents can use that context to find issues and ship improvements, not just surface them. You can steer this from wherever you already work:
```

- In [Slack](/slack) – tag @PostHog to ask a data question ("which model is driving our token costs this week?") or kick off a fix.
- In your editor [(via MCP)](/mcp) – wire PostHog's live product context into Claude Code, Codex, or your own agent so it can pull real data and act on it.
- On the desktop [(PostHog Code)](/code) – run coding agents on top of your product data, with signals turned into a ranked inbox.
- In the app [(PostHog AI)](/ai) – ask questions in plain English, build dashboards, and dig into traces or replays without writing SQL.

### 4. We offer transparent pricing with no seat fees

We charge based on what you use. There are no per-seat fees and no gated tiers where the feature you need is locked behind a paid tier or enterprise upgrade. Every tool on our platform has a generous free tier, and more than 90% of PostHog customers use the platform without paying a cent.

For [AI observability](/ai-observability) specifically, PostHog is free for up to 100,000 events and costs $0.00006/event after that threshold. In fact, you get 2 times more free events compared to Langfuse's free plan, with more products built-in.

> Also, we offer 100% transparent [pricing](/pricing), and our [startup program](/startups) comes with $50,000 in credit.

Reviewer: 1. 4 is too many here
2. Langfuse also doesn't have seat fees
3. Langfuse also has pretty transparent pricing 

```suggestion
```

<WizardCTA />

> ## Comparing PostHog and Langfuse

Reviewer: I think this section should be tables with light commentary and focus more on comparisons and differences in When to choose PostHog vs Langfuse and Recommendations by team type

Before we get into AI observability specifically, here's how Langfuse vs PostHog breaks down across the board.

> ### Platform

Reviewer: To be honest, I think it would be better focus on observability features first as that is what readers are coming here for. As far as I know, we size up pretty well. I would expect to see:

- AI observability
- Cost tracking
- Evaluation (LLM-as-judge)
- Prompt management
- Prompt playground

Maybe a few others?

It also avoids the huge wall of Xs which we frown upon doing.

Reviewer: Maybe a "core features" section with AI observability + product analytics + error tracking + logs? And leave some of the other stuff for other sections?

<p>
<ProductComparisonTable
    competitors={['posthog', 'langfuse']}
    rows={[
        'ai_observability',
        'product_analytics',
        'web_analytics',
        'session_replay',
        'feature_flags',
        'experiments',
        'error_tracking',
        'surveys',
        'data_warehouse',
        'cdp',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_management',
        'ai_observability.features.human_annotation',
        'ai_observability.features.evaluation_datasets',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_playground',
        'platform.deployment.open_source',
        'platform.deployment.eu_hosting',
    ]}
/>
</p>

> [AI observability](/blog/what-is-ai-observability) is the one area where PostHog and Langfuse overlap. At the moment, both of these trace LLM calls and support `OpenTelemetry,` so you can inspect individual generations with token counts and inputs/outputs. But where they actually diverge is what each tool builds around that trace data.

Reviewer: we've already said this

> PostHog treats traces as product data. So, it's another signal you can query and [correlate alongside everything else](/docs/ai-observability/integrations) you're already tracking. Langfuse treats traces as the core object and builds dedicated workflows on top of the following:

Reviewer: I feel like this is the third time we've been over this so it's not really necessary.

- Prompt versioning
- Evaluation pipelines
- Annotation queues

> - Dataset experiments

Reviewer: Also, can't we just list these are features?

> If you need those LLM-specific workflows today, Langfuse has more of them. If you need your AI data connected to product analytics, session replay, feature flags, experimentation, and a lot more, PostHog is the better alternative.

Reviewer: This is probably better commentary for below.

        },
        {
            label: 'Cost trends',
            description: 'Historical cost over time',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        {
            label: 'Cost by user',
            description: 'See what individual users cost you',
            values: [true, 'Partial'],
        },
        {
            label: 'Cost by feature',
            description: 'Break down spending by product feature',
            values: [true, false],
        },
        {
            label: 'Cost by cohort',
            description: 'Compare costs across user segments',
            values: [true, false],
        },
    ]}
/>
</p>

**Heads-up:** Even though both tools tell you how much you're spending on LLM calls, the questions they answer are completely different. Langfuse breaks down costs by trace and model, which is useful for finding which calls are expensive.

But PostHog adds another layer to that question. You can dig into the user-side of things and answer questions like "Which user segment costs us the most?" or "Do high-value users cost more than users who churn?" You can do this because cost data sits alongside your product analytics and can be queried with SQL.

> ## Everything else PostHog gives you

Reviewer: We should remove this whole section, too much one sided selling

If you roll out a feature and error rates spike 15 minutes later, you'll see it in your dashboard immediately and know which change caused it because the data lives on the same platform. Langfuse doesn't offer this right off the bat.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Surveys, data warehouse, and web analytics</summary>

Here are a few more pieces that round out PostHog's capabilities:

- Use Surveys for in-app feedback collection and NPS. You can ask users directly whether your AI feature helped, then correlate their responses with trace data and session recordings.

- Use the data warehouse to import data from `Stripe`, `HubSpot`, `S3`, `Postgres`, and other platforms. You can connect revenue data with AI usage to answer questions like "What's the LTV of users who engage with AI features?"

- Use Web Analytics to track website traffic, UTM parameters, sources, and conversions. You'll be able to measure the full funnel from landing page to AI feature activation and see how users move through your website as well.

</details>

> ## Pricing and open source

Reviewer: Great!
